WHO's goodwill ambassador Yohei Sasakawa urges for collaboration to eliminate leprosy

KATHMANDU, SEPTEMBER 18
The World Health Organisation's Goodwill Ambassador for Leprosy Elimination, Yohei Sasakawa, emphasized today that deep-rooted social stigma surrounding leprosy must be addressed to eradicate the world's oldest and most feared disease. Sasakawa, 85, who is also the Chairperson of the Nippon Foundation, stated that the disease should be fought at the community level, as victims still face social discrimination. "The wrong beliefs of the people cause the disease to persist in society," Sasakawa said during an interaction with the media in Kathmandu.Leprosy, also known as Hansen's disease, is an infectious disease that primarily affects the skin and peripheral nerves. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately 200,000 new cases were reported annually. Leprosy is curable with multidrug therapy, but if left untreated, it can lead to permanent disability.
In Nepal, over 2,500 new cases were reported in 2023, making it one of 23 countries on the WHO's priority list for leprosy elimination. Most cases are found in the Tarai region bordering India. Sasakawa has visited Nepal many times to observe the situation firsthand. "The close cooperation between the Health Ministry and leprosy NGOs maximizes their respective strengths, complementing each other's efforts and helping to advance leprosy measures across the country," he said.Sasakawa pledged continued support from the Nippon Foundation to achieve the elimination goal in the years to come. The foundation has already spent over $300 million globally on leprosy elimination programs. Sasakawa also launched the campaign "Don't Forget Leprosy" to ensure that leprosy and the needs of those affected are not overlooked, even amid the pandemic. The campaign highlights the importance of early detection and treatment, as well as the need to eliminate stigma and discrimination. "There is a need to enhance collaboration among stakeholders to achieve the elimination goal," Sasakawa emphasized.During his stay in Nepal, Sasakawa met with the Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli, the Minister of Health and Population, and other high-level government and civil society leaders to discuss the country's leprosy control program, according to Santa Bir Lama, former president of the Nepal Mountaineering Association.In a meeting, Prime Minister Oli affirmed the government's commitment to eliminating leprosy by 2030 and agreed to hold a leprosy congress next year.Since Sasakawa's appointment as WHO Goodwill Ambassador for Leprosy Elimination in 2001, the Nippon Foundation has intensified its work toward a world free of leprosy and the problems associated with it. As the Japanese Government Goodwill Ambassador for the Human Rights of Persons Affected by Leprosy, Sasakawa will also visit Madhesh Province, the most leprosy-endemic area in Nepal, according to Lama, who coordinates Sasakawa's Leprosy Initiatives in Nepal.